How did it ever get to court? Police and prosecutors on the rack as ex Deputy Speaker Nigel Evans is cleared of nine sex charges

MP Nigel Evans should never have faced trial over claims he was a rapist and a sex pest, colleagues – and even one of his alleged victims – said last night.

The former Commons Deputy Speaker spoke of his ‘11 months of hell’ after a jury took less than six hours to acquit him of sex offences against seven men.

The trial heard that only two of the alleged victims had complained to police. The other five had their names passed to officers as people who could vouch for Mr Evans’s alleged unwanted advances.

But one of the men said last night he had never wanted Mr Evans to be prosecuted, branding police ‘over-zealous’. Another admitted to embellishing his account ‘for dramatic effect’, while a third – allegedly traumatised by a sexual assault – was revealed to have remained a close friend of the Ribble Valley MP, even referring to him as an ‘all-round good egg’.

Last night one senior Tory called for the Attorney General to investigate the prosecution, saying it had led to a risk of a serious injustice being done to an innocent man.

Mr Evans’s solicitor, Daniel Berk, said police had gone out of their way to find people with complaints against his client in a way they would not have done had he not been so high-profile.

Similar questions were asked only nine weeks ago when Coronation Street star William Roache, 81, was acquitted of sex offences in the same courtroom, prompting accusations of a celebrity witch-hunt.

Mr Evans, 56, mentioned Mr Roache as he spoke of his relief on the steps of Preston Crown Court after being cleared of rape, five sexual assaults, one attempted sexual assault and two indecent assaults.

He stood in the dock, hands clasped in front of him, listening to each not guilty verdict.

By the time he was cleared of the eighth count he couldn't contain his emotions no longer, his face crumpled and he began to weep, wiping away his tears with a white tissue.

As he was cleared of the ninth and final count his supporters in the gallery let out a gasp of relief and burst into tears.

The MP, who stepped down as Deputy Speaker to fight the case at a personal cost of £200,000, wept as the jury found him not guilty, saying: ‘Thank you.’

Outside court Mr Evans said he had gone through ‘11 months of hell’ and it was no time for celebration.

He added: ‘Bill Roache just a few weeks ago from this very spot said there are no winners in these cases and that’s absolutely right. All I can say is that after the last 11 months that I’ve gone through, nothing will ever be the same again.’

His acquittal is another major blow to the Crown Prosecution Service, following those of Mr Roache and DJ Dave Lee Travis.

Mr Evans had spoken publicly of his ‘incredulity’ a day after the initial accusations were put to him by detectives last May, branding them ‘completely false’.

In the weeks that followed, a series of further allegations surfaced and he was arrested again, giving the impression that a number of people had reported his behaviour to police.

But it emerged during his trial that only two of the seven alleged victims had contacted police directly.

Two were spoken to after their names were passed to detectives, and were produced in court as victims by the prosecution. Both told police they did not regard what had happened as a crime and did not want Mr Evans to be prosecuted.

The prosecution had suggested that after becoming open about his homosexuality around Westminster in the early 2000s – although he did not come out publicly until 2010 – Mr Evans drunkenly took sexual liberties with politically ambitious young men.

But he insisted that he was the victim of a plot among Westminster workers co-ordinated by a former friend who had reported an unwanted advance at his constituency home in 2009 to Tory whips, but never reported it to police.

The man eventually spoke to police last May after telling Tory MP Dr Sarah Wollaston what he claimed had happened.

She informed Speaker John Bercow who said it was a police matter after being told another young man had accused Mr Evans of rape.

In court, Mr Evans insisted the alleged rape had been consensual sex, and accused other complainants of telling ‘absurd’ stories as part of a co-ordinated effort to wreck his political career.

As police and prosecutors faced the latest storm over their handling of a high-profile sex offences case, former shadow Home Secretary David Davis said it highlighted ‘serious concerns’.

‘It is clear from the way that this case proceeded that there is a risk of a serious injustice being done to an innocent man, and I would call on the Attorney General to urgently review this issue.’ 

Mr Evans quit his £102,000-a-year job as Deputy Speaker after being charged last September and has since sat as an independent backbencher. The court heard that the only costs he can potentially claim back are his travel expenses.

Last night sources at his Ribble Valley constituency association said they would meet in the next few weeks to consider whether to reselect him as their candidate for the 2015 General Election.

Detective Superintendent Ian Critchley, of Lancashire Police, defended the use of testimony from men who did not regard what they said Mr Evans had done as a crime. ‘All of the evidence was subjected to careful scrutiny before a decision was taken to charge [Mr Evans]’ he said.

The CPS said it respected the verdict, adding: ‘It was right that all of the evidence was put before a jury.’

Friends of the MP raised questions yesterday about the conduct of the CPS and said it had to explain its actions.

Mr Evans's solicitor, Daniel Berk, expressed concern at the way the case had been brought by the police and the CPS.

'They put far more resources into this than they would if the complainant was a member of the public and the defendant was not somebody in the public eye,' he told the BBC Radio 4 PM programme.

'I have dealt with cases involving allegations of rape and sexual assault before. Normally there would be a couple of detective constables investigating it and perhaps a middle-ranking barrister prosecuting.

'In this case there was a large police team. It came out in evidence that the police had gone out of their way to find complaints - two of which dated back 10 years and both of whom said in evidence that they were somewhat surprised to find themselves in court.

'They also instructed senior Treasury counsel - a QC - which, again, would not be typical in a case like this.'

It comes as fellow MPs claimed prosecutors face serious questions over the decision to take the matter to court.

Conservative MP Peter Bone tweeted: 'Good day for Nigel Evans but why was he charged in the first place?' Before adding: 'Serious questions for the police and CPS to answer! So pleased for Nigel.'

Fellow Tory Alun Cairns tweeted: 'Surely prosecutors have questions to answer in Nigel Evans case, after Roach & Le Vell.'

Lancashire Constabulary said all of the evidence was subjected to 'careful scrutiny' before Mr Evans was charged, particularly with regard to those complainants who did not see themselves as victims.

Detective Superintendent Ian Critchley, the force's head of public protection, said: 'We have worked closely with the Crown Prosecution Service from an early stage, and all of the evidence was subjected to careful scrutiny before a decision was taken to charge, particularly where complainants did not see themselves as victims.

'Only after that very careful consideration was the decision made to put this before a jury in the belief that there was sufficient evidence to justify a realistic prospect of conviction.'

He said he respected the verdicts reached by the jury but vowed that the force remained committed to investigating such offences 'no matter how historic, and no matter what the role, position and status of the alleged offender'.

The rape complainant, aged 22, told the jury he was raped and sexually assaulted by Evans after a dinner party at the defendant's home in Pendleton, Lancashire, in March last year. But the gay MP said the sex was consensual.

Peter Wright QC, defending, suggested the complainant gave a false account because he regretted having sex with a man more than twice his age. The barrister said that was no basis on which to convict.

In 2003, Evans was said to have indecently assaulted two men in their 20s when he approached them in public places while drunk and put his hand down their trousers - one in a Soho bar and the other at a hotel bar during the 2003 Tory party conference in Blackpool.

The jury heard in his defence that these were examples of ‘drunken over-familiarity’ rather than the ingredients of a criminal offence and Evans had no recollection of either event.

Another complainant said he was sexually assaulted by Evans while sleeping on the sofa at the MP's Lancashire home in July 2009.

Evans admitted he had made a pass and apologised to the young man after he was hauled into the Conservative whips' office, the court heard, but denied he had put his hand in the complainant's boxer shorts.

The jury was told the allegation ‘gathered a momentum of its own’ after the man mentioned the incident to another MP last year, which in turn ‘propelled’ him into a meeting with Speaker John Bercow.

He was accused of embellishing his story when it became a police matter but two of his close friends bolstered his allegation by coming forward to say they too had been sexually assaulted by the MP.

One friend said he had to push Evans away after the MP leant in to kiss him behind a curtain near the Strangers Bar at the House of Commons in 2009. Evans joked the man had ‘a mouth powered by Duracell’ and told police: ‘I wouldn't kiss him for fear of turning into a frog.’

The other friend said Evans ‘cupped’ his genitals in the same bar when introduced to him in 2010 - an allegation Evans labelled ‘absurd’.

The MP said both men were lying and said another complainant made up his claim that he pushed him into a darkened kitchenette near the deputy speaker's office and groped him in 2011.

Evans was a Conservative MP before he was elected in 2010 as one of three deputy speakers, a politically neutral role. He stepped down as a deputy speaker last September after he was charged with the offences, involving men who were all in their 20s at the time.

He has not returned to the Conservatives in the Commons and is representing his constituents as an independent.

The jury reached unanimous verdicts after deliberating for just over five hours and 45 minutes.

A Tory spokesman said: 'We are very pleased Nigel Evans has been cleared of all charges after this very difficult time.'

Party sources indicated there would be discussions about Mr Evans's future with the parliamentary and constituency association in the coming days and weeks.

The MP had given up the party whip to become deputy speaker, and could potentially have it returned.

Even David Cameron has hinted that Evans will be brought back into the Tory fold as he joined those welcoming news that the MP had been cleared of sex offence charges.

The Prime Minister said it was 'hard to imagine the relief' that the former deputy speaker was feeling after 'such a traumatic time'.

'I very much welcome what he said on the steps of the court and I think everyone should pay heed to that,' Mr Cameron said.

'I'm sure he will want to get on with working with his constituents in the Ribble Valley and, as for the future, I'm sure it's something he'll be discussing with the chief whip when he returns to Parliament.'
