Alton Towers accident: Theme Park to remain closed for FIFTH day after horror rollercoaster crash

Top UK theme park Alton Towers will remain closed for a fifth day on Sunday, after Tuesday’s horrific rollercoaster crash which left four people badly hurt.

Alton Towers has been closed since the smash on The Smiler but is expected to re-open “within the next few days”.

The park said guests with pre-booked tickets have the option to use their tickets tomorrow at an alternative attraction.

Customers with pre-booked tickets can also obtain a full refund or alternative dated tickets.

The injured victims were Daniel Thorpe, a 27-year-old hotel assistant manager from Buxton in Derbyshire, Vicky Balch, 20, from Leyland in Lancashire, textile design student Joe Pugh, 18, from Barnsley, South Yorkshire, and his girlfriend, Leah Washington, 17.

The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) yesterday removed the carriages involved in the incident for further analysis.

HSE inspectors have served a prohibition notice on the rollercoaster stopping its use until action is taken to deal with the cause of the failure.

Neil Craig, Head of Operations for HSE in the Midlands, said: "The notice is specific to the ‘Smiler’ ride and does not affect other rides at the park. HSE expects the park operator to apply any early learning from the incident to wider risk management at the site.

"The decision about when to re-open the park is for the owners to make."

Three more roller coasters have been closed amid safety fears after the Alton Towers crash.

The decision came as the family of one of the seriously injured victims vowed to sue the Staffordshire theme park for "significant damages".

Talented dancer Vicky Balch, who turns 20 today, is still critically ill – although surgeons have managed to save both her crushed legs.

The family of injured Miss Balch say they hope serious consideration will be given to a criminal prosecution against Alton Towers. Parents Brian, 55, and Karen, 56, have also hired lawyers to seek a “substantial damages claim”.

They remained at their daughter’s bedside in Stoke-on-Trent.

As a probe into Tuesday’s crash on The Smiler roller coaster continued, Merlin Entertainments closed similar attractions at Thorpe Park, Surrey, and Chessington World of Adventures in south west London.

The Smiler and the Thorpe Park’s Saw will shut for the foreseeable future.

Chessington’s Dragon’s Fury and Rattlesnake will close for a shorter time.

The moves came after the operators introduced new safety regulations in the wake of the accident in which a carriage slammed into an empty car at 50mph.
