Police Search for Gunman in Attack on Brooklyn Subway

A man set off smoke grenades in a crowded subway car and then opened fire, the police said. At least 23 people were injured. The police named a “person of interest.”

The police in New York on Tuesday evening identified a man they called a “person of interest” in the mass shooting on a crowded subway train in Brooklyn during the morning rush earlier that day that injured nearly two dozen people, five of them critically.

The man, Frank R. James, 62, had rented a U-Haul van in Philadelphia, the police said. A key to the van, they said, was found in a collection of belongings on the train that they believed belonged to the gunman, including a Glock 9-millimeter handgun, three ammunition magazines, a hatchet, fireworks and a liquid believed to be gasoline.

The police found the van abandoned on a street late Tuesday afternoon, about five blocks from the Kings Highway station, where they say the gunman had gotten on the subway, and five miles from the 36th Street station, where the shooting unfolded.

Mr. James remains at large, James Essig, the Police Department’s chief of detectives, said in a news conference at police headquarters.

“We are endeavoring to locate him to determine his connection to the subway shooting, if any,” Chief Essig said.

Mr. James has addresses in Philadelphia and Wisconsin, the police said.

He appeared to have posted dozens of videos on YouTube, where he riffed off news events in long, vitriolic rants. He blamed Black women for violence among Black people and pointed to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine as evidence that whites are genocidal.

Shortly before 8:30 a.m., the police said, a heavyset, dark-skinned man in a construction vest and construction helmet donned a gas mask as a crowded N train approached the 36th Street station in the Sunset Park neighborhood, tossed two smoke grenades on the floor of the car, and began firing the gun. Thirty-three shots later, he fled.

Ten people were hit by gunfire, the police said. Five of the victims were critically injured, but none of their wounds were life-threatening, the Fire Department said. The 10 gunshot victims made the shooting the worst in the history of the New York City subway. Another 13 people suffered injuries related to smoke inhalation, falls or panic attacks, Chief Essig said.

The shooting came as the city was already struggling to cope with both a rise in shootings citywide and an increase in crime and disorder in the subway that has scared commuters from returning to a transit system that saw ridership plummet during the pandemic. It set off panic and chaos aboard the train, in the station and the surrounding streets and sent schools in the vicinity into lockdowns that lasted much of the day.

Mayor Eric Adams said that the search for the gunman was hampered by the fact that at least one security camera at the 36th Street subway station that might have captured the scene was not operating.

The N train snakes through working-class neighborhoods filled with immigrants from all over Asia and Latin America. As the shooting unfolded and the doors of the train opened, sending smoke billowing through 36th Street station, fearful riders fled, many of them hurrying onto an R train sitting across the platform. Subway seats and cars were streaked with blood as people called for help.

Around the 36th Street station, dozens of police vehicles with flashing lights clogged the streets and helicopters flew overhead.

The suspect in Tuesday’s subway attack in Brooklyn appears to have posted dozens of videos on social media in recent years — lengthy rants in which he expressed a range of harshly bigoted views and, more recently, criticized the policies of New York City’s mayor, Eric Adams.

The man, Frank R. James, 62, has addresses in Wisconsin and Philadelphia, the police said.

Two law enforcement officials said that a credit card with Mr. James’s name on it had been found at the scene of the shooting, as had a key to a van that Mr. James had rented, along with a Glock 9-millimeter handgun, three ammunition magazines, a hatchet, fireworks and a liquid believed to be gasoline.

It appeared that Mr. James had rented the van in Philadelphia sometime over the last several days, driven it close to the subway line where the attack occurred and abandoned it there, one official said. The police found the van eight hours after the attack.

As the hunt for Mr. James continued, New York police officials and their federal counterparts asked that people share cellphone video from the shooting site or elsewhere that might help bring the manhunt to a swift conclusion, and sent an emergency alert on Wednesday morning asking residents to direct any information about Mr. James to the N.Y.P.D. tip line at 1-800-577-TIPS.

The authorities offered up to $50,000 in reward money for information leading to the arrest and indictment of Mr. James.

The police also released a screenshot of Mr. James taken from a YouTube video posted by a channel belonging to the username prophetoftruth88.

The videos featured a man — who appeared to be the same man in a picture released by the police — delivering extended tirades, many of them overtly concerned with race and violence, often tying those subjects in with current events, including the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the policies of Mr. Adams. Two law enforcement officials said that Mr. James was the person featured in the channel’s videos.

In a video posted to YouTube on March 1, the person featured in the video criticized Mr. Adams for recently announced policies addressing public safety in the subways, which focused on homeless people.

Ms. Sewell said at the news conference Tuesday that Mr. Adams’s security detail would be increased in light of the videos.

Another video on the channel, posted in 2020, appeared to have been taken in New York’s subways. In that video, the person holding the camera simply trains it on a crowded subway car.

Officials said that consumer-grade fireworks, gasoline and two unused smoke grenades had been recovered from the scene of a shooting, and a photograph circulated on social media on Tuesday appeared to show the fireworks, along with other material.

William Weimer, a vice president at Phantom Fireworks, said that a man named Frank James from Milwaukee had purchased several brands of the fireworks seen in the photo from the Phantom Fireworks’ showroom outside of Racine, Wis., last June.

The New York City subway was already struggling. A pandemic-fueled ridership plunge left the system facing a fiscal cliff. A rise in random attacks scared off passengers in droves. The shift to remote work that seems poised to outlive the coronavirus may mean ridership never fully recovers.

Mayor Eric Adams and Gov. Kathy Hochul have spent months cheerleading the return of the subway. They also sent hundreds of police officers to stations to tame crime and force out homeless people. The number of weekday passengers was still more than 40 percent below pre-pandemic levels in March.

Then came Tuesday, and a subway nightmare the city had never before endured. As a crowded morning-rush train lurched along in Brooklyn, a man with a gun and several extended magazines of ammunition began firing at helpless passengers who had nowhere to hide.

With the gunman still at large, Mr. Adams ordered the police to flood the system with even more officers, but the attack seemed to underscore the limits of policing as a preventive strategy. Officers had patrolled inside the station several times Tuesday morning but were not there when the gunman struck, the police said.

In a disturbing video posted in January, a man whom law enforcement officials identified as Frank R. James, who was named a suspect on Wednesday morning and is now in police custody, bragged that it would be easy to get away with causing mayhem in the subway and mocked Mr. Adams’s efforts at reducing subway crime.

“He may slow it down, but he ain’t stopping it,” Mr. James says. “That means you’d have to police in every station and that’s just not possible.”

The subway’s own infrastructure issues may have slowed efforts to find the gunman. At least one security camera that could have captured an image of the gunman recorded nothing, the mayor said. A law enforcement official said that none of the cameras were in full operation.

All of which complicates the mayor’s and governor’s efforts to convince people that the subways are safe to return to. And it has a lot of New Yorkers who have spent their lives riding the trains thinking very hard.

“I’m terrified of taking the subway,” said James Lee, 33, who lives in the Flushing neighborhood of Queens and works near the subway station where the shooting took place. “I never take public transportation anymore in New York, period.”

Ellen Silbermann, who at 71 has lived through New York in the 1970s and 80s when crime was much higher than it is now, pronounced Tuesday’s events “sort of apocalyptic.”

But John Butsikares, a 15-year-old who was on his way to Brooklyn Technical High School when the train doors opened onto a scene of panic and smoke and blood, said he refused to let the violence deter him.

“We have to keep living our lives,” he said. Then he added, “I’m just hoping the police will keep us safe.”

Subway service resumed at the 36th Street station in Brooklyn after the New York Police Department concluded their investigation there into Tuesday’s mass shooting, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said early Wednesday.

The attack at the station, in the Sunset Park neighborhood, snarled subway lines all over the city on Tuesday at the height of the morning rush. Most service had resumed by Tuesday evening, but trains were still bypassing the 36th Street station. Street traffic in the area near the shooting was bumper-to-bumper for much of the day.

As of 7 a.m. Wednesday, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said it was running full service on all of its lines.

The New York Police Department fanned across the five boroughs early Wednesday searching for clues and offered a $50,000 reward for information that leads to the arrest of the gunman who fired 33 shots on a rush-hour subway train in Brooklyn.

New York police officials and their federal counterparts asked specifically that people share cellphone video from the shooting site or elsewhere that might help bring the manhunt to a swift conclusion. Police have identified a person of interest and said the reward could go to those who help find him.

“Everyone’s got a cellphone in their pocket,” Michael J. Driscoll, the assistant director in charge of the F.B.I.’s New York office, said at a Tuesday evening news conference. “There’s a lot of video out there.”

The initial subject of the search was Frank R. James, the 62-year-old man identified as a person of interest in the case, with investigators focusing their immediate attention on addresses in Milwaukee and Philadelphia where he had recently lived.

Mr. James’s ties to Philadelphia, the police said, included his recent rental there of a van that he drove to an area of Brooklyn near the subway line where the shooting occurred and abandoned.

The police said they had found a key to the van among various other items — a Glock 9-millimeter handgun, three ammunition magazines, a hatchet, fireworks and a liquid believed to be gasoline — that they believed the gunman had left on the train. The van was found on a Brooklyn street several hours after the shooting.

“We are endeavoring to locate him to determine his connection to the subway shooting, if any,” James Essig, New York City’s chief of detectives, said of Mr. James while speaking at the news conference.

“We are asking for anyone’s help with information,” he added, while announcing the reward.

The fireworks found on the subway — a photograph of which circulated on social media Tuesday — appeared to open another investigative trail leading to Mr. James. According to a fireworks seller in Racine, Wis., a man named Frank James bought several similar brands of consumer-grade fireworks there last June.

In addition to physical and video evidence, investigators were also delving into Mr. James’s activity online, where he posted dozens of videos in recent years, many of them angry diatribes peppered with bigotry.

In his call for the public’s help, Mr. Driscoll of the F.B.I. urged people to contact the agency about any online material they believed to be relevant.

“If you have digital information that you’d like to share with us in connection with this investigation, please visit fbi.gov,” he said.

Police officers in New York City have been hunting for a suspect in the Brooklyn subway shooting for more than 12 hours, a reminder that frantic searches in past attacks can drag on for days, weeks or even months.

Some ended in a matter of minutes.

In December 2017, a would-be suicide attacker was subdued by Port Authority police officers moments after he detonated a pipe bomb strapped to his body in a subway corridor near Times Square. The makeshift bomb had malfunctioned, and no one was killed. An officer found the bomber, Akayed Ullah, by rushing toward the smoke.

Other manhunts have taken far longer and required considerably more police work — and, in a few cases, splashes of luck.

In March, the suspect in a series of shootings that killed two homeless men in New York and Washington was arrested three days after his last known attack. Police officers found the suspect, Gerald Brevard III, walking near a gas station about five miles from the White House. The police later said that their manhunt had been aided by tips from the public.

Last April, police officers in Florida arrested Farrakhan Muhammad, the suspect in a Times Square shooting that had injured two women and a 4-year-old Brooklyn girl four days earlier. Mr. Muhammad had unwittingly tipped investigators off when he was caught on video stopping at a Walmart in North Carolina.

And in 2017, a convicted murderer was arrested in Florida and charged for a stabbing months earlier in Lower Manhattan. The police in Florida found the suspect, Frank Caserta, only because they had been investigating the unrelated theft of a mobile phone.

When officers tracked the stolen phone to a Florida home where Mr. Caserta was staying, he was holding it when he answered the door.
