North Korea sentences U-Va. student to 15 years of hard labor in prison

SEOUL — White House and U.S. State Department officials have urged the North Korean government to pardon and release a University of Virginia student being held there, saying his 15-year sentence in prison with hard labor for trying to steal a propaganda sign was unduly harsh and amounts to using the 21-year-old as a political pawn.

Otto Warmbier, an economics major from Cincinnati who had gone to North Korea with a tour group, was accused of trying to steal a sign from a Pyongyang hotel where he was staying in January. He was convicted and sentenced Wednesday after a one-hour trial in the Supreme Court. Video footage showed Warmbier, dressed in the same clothes he was wearing during a highly choreographed news conference last month, being led into the court room in handcuffs.

Diplomats from the Swedish Embassy in Pyongyang, which represents American interests in North Korea because the United States does not have diplomatic relations with the country, were present at the trial.

Bill Richardson, former governor of New Mexico and a diplomat who has secured the release of detainees from North Korea and elsewhere, is working to bring Warmbier back home, imploring the government to release him on humanitarian grounds. Richardson met Tuesday morning with two members of the North Korean mission to the United Nations in New York after Warmbier’s parents and Ohio Gov. John Kasich asked him to intervene, he said.

“This is a kid,” whose humanitarian release shouldn’t be complicated by the tense relations between the U.S. and North Korea, Richardson said. “I offered to help get him out.”

The two North Korean officials, with whom Richardson has dealt before on similar cases, said they would convey his request. “But I know the State Department is doing their best.”

Typically in such cases, negotiating can begin after sentencing, Richardson said.

Warmbier is well-liked and admired in his hometown and at U-Va., described by friends as buoyant, funny, a fraternity brother, someone who is smart and serious about academics. He was a commencement speaker at his high school and was honored with a scholarship at U-Va. given to a small number of students who are leaders and intellectual risk-takers.

Warmbier had been on his way to Hong Kong for a financial course connected to his U-Va. studies when he was arrested in the Pyongyang airport as he was leaving the country Jan. 2, at the end of the tour. Three weeks later, the North Korean government announced that it was holding the student for an unspecified “hostile act” against the state.

In February, Warmbier participated in a highly orchestrated news conference in Pyongyang, admitting to a “very severe and pre-planned crime,” saying he tried to steal a political sign from his hotel that promoted the North Korean people’s “love for their system,” according to the official Korean Central News Agency.

“The aim of my task was to harm the motivation and work ethic of the Korean people. This was a very foolish aim,” Warmbier said at the time.

Warmbier was charged with subversion under Article 60 of North Korea’s criminal code, the Associated Press reported from Pyongyang. The court held that he had committed a crime “pursuant to the U.S. government’s hostile policy toward [the North], in a bid to impair the unity of its people after entering it as a tourist,” the state-run Korean Central News Agency reported Wednesday.
